## Keynote

Moderator: *So that was your applause, Glenn! Welcome to the 30th Chaos Communication Congress, in Hamburg. The floor is yours!*

Thank you, thank you very much.

Thank you everybody, for that warm welcome, and thank you as well to
the Congress organizers for inviting me to speak.

My reaction when I learned that I had been asked to deliver the
keynote to this conference was probably similar to the one some of you
had, which was, "wait, what?"

[laughter from the audience]

And the reason is that my cryptographic and hacker skills are not
exactly world-reknowned. You know, the story has been told many times
of how I almost lost the biggest national security story in the last
decade, at least because I found the installation of PGP to be
insurmountably annoying and difficult.

[applause]

There's another story, that's very similar, that illustrates the same
point, that I actually don't think has been told before, which is:
prior to my going to Hong Kong, I spent many hours with both Laura
Poitras and Edward Snowden, trying to get up to speed on the basics of
security technology that I would need in order to report on this
story. They tried to tutor me in all sorts of programs, and finally
concluded that the only one, at least at that time, for that moment,
that I could handle, was [TrueCrypt](https://truecrypt.org). 

They taught me the basics of TrueCrypt, and when I went to Hong Kong,
before I went to sleep, I would play around with TrueCrypt. I kind of
taught myself a couple of functions that they hadn't even taught me
and really had this sort of confidence.

On the third or fourth day, I went over to meet both of them, and I
was beaming with pride. I showed them all of the new things that I had
taught myself how to do on TrueCrypt, and pronounced myself this
Cryptographic Master. That I was really becoming advanced.

I looked at both of them, and I didn't see any return pride coming my
way. Actually, what I saw was them trying, really hard, to avoid
rolling their eyes out of their heads at me, to one another.

I said, "Why are you reacting that way? Why isn't that a great
accomplishment?" They sort of let some moments go by. No one wanted to
break it to me until finally Snowden piped in and said, "TrueCrypt is
really meant for your little kid brother to be able to master. It's
not all that impressive."

[laughter from the audience]

I remember being very deflated, and kind of going back to the drawing
board. Well, that was six months ago. In the interim, the importance
of security technology and privacy technology has become really
central to everything it is that I do. I really have learned an
enormous amount, about both its importance and how it functions. I'm
far from the only one. I think one of the most significant outcomes of
the last six months, but one of the most underdiscussed, is how many
people now appreciate the importance of protecting the security of
their communications.

If you go and look at my inbox from July, probably 3-5% of the emails
I received were composed of PGP code. That percentage is definitely
above 50% today, and probably well above 50%. When we talked about
forming our new media company, we barely spent any time on the
question. It was simply assumed that we were all going to use the most
sophisticated encryption that was available to communicate with one
another. 

I think, most encouragingly, whenever I'm contacted by anyone in
journalism or activism, or any related fields, they either use
encryption, or are embarrassed and ashamed that they dont, and
apologize for the fact that they don't, and vow that they're soon
going to.

It's a really remarkable sea-change, even from the middle of last
year, when I would talk to some of the leading national security
journalists *in the world* who were working on some of the most
sensitive information, and virtually none of them knew what PGP or OTR
or any other of the leading privacy technologies were, let alone how
to use them. It's really encouraging to see this technology spreading
so pervasively. 

I think that this underscores a really important point, one that gives
me great cause for optimism. I'm often asked whether I think that the
stories that we've been learning over the last six months, the
reporting and the debates that have arisen will actually change
anything and impose any real limits on the US surveillance state.

Typically, when people think the answer to that question is yes, the
thing that they cite most commonly is probably [really significant],
which is that there's going to be some kind of debate, and our
representatives in democratic government are going to respond to our
debate, and they're going to impose limits with legislative reform.

None of that is likely to happen. The US government and its allies are
not going to voluntarily restrict their own surveillance powers in any
meaningful way. In fact, the tactic of the US government that we've
seen over and over, that we've seen historically, is to do the very
opposite, which is that when they get caught doing something that
brings them disrepute and causes scandal and concern, they're very
adept at pretending to reform themselves through symbolic gestures,
while at the same time, doing very little, other than placating
citizen anger and often increasing their own powers that created the
scandal in the first place.

We saw that in the mid-1970s, when there were serious concern and
alarm in the United States, at least as much as there is now, if not
more so, of the US government's surveillance capabilities and abuse.
What the US government did in response was that they said, "Well,
we're going to engage in all of these reforms, that will safeguard
these powers. We're going to create a special court that the
government needs to go to to get permission before they can target
people with surveillance.

That sounded great, but then they created the court in the most warped
way possible. It's a secret court, where only the government gets to
show up, where only the most pro-national security judges are
appointed. So this court gave the appearance of oversight, when in
reality it's the most grotesque rubber stamp that is known to the
Western world. They almost never disapprove of anything. It simply
created the appearance that there was judicial oversight.

They also said they were going to create Congressional committees. The
intelligence committees that are going to have as their main function
overseeing the intelligence committees, and making certain that they
no longer abuse their power. What they did instead was immediately
install the most servile loyalists of the intelligence committees as
head of this so-called "oversight committee".

That's been going on for decades, and today we have two of the most
slavish, pro-NSA members of Congress as the heads of these committees
who are really there to bolster and justify anything and everything
the NSA does, rather than engage in real oversight. So, again, it's
designed to prettify the process while bringing about no real reform.

This process is now repeating itself. You see the President appoint a
handful of his closest loyalists to this "independent White House
panel" that pretended to issue a report that was very balanced and
critical of the surveillance state, but in reality, introduced a
variety of programs that, at the very best, would simply make these
programs slightly more palatable from a public perspective, and in
many cases, intensify the powers of the surveillance state, rather than
reining them in in any meaningful way.

So the answer to whether we're or not going to have meaningful reform
definitely does not lie in the typical processes of democratic
accountability that we're all taught to respect. But they do lie
elsewhere. It is possible that there will be courts that will impose
some meaningful restrictions by finding that the programs are
unconstitutional. 

It's much more possible that other countries around the world who are
truly indignant about the breaches of their privacy security will band
together and create alternatives, either in terms of infrastructure,
or legal regimes that will prevent the United States from exercising
hedgemony over the Internet or make the cost of doing so far too high.
I think, even more promising is the fact that large private
corporations, Internet companies and others will start finally paying
a price for their collaboration with this spying regime. 

We've seen that already, when they've been dragged into the light, and
finally now are forced to account for what it is that they're doing,
and to realize that their economic interests are imperiled by the
spying system, exercising their unparallelled power to demand that it
be reined in. I think that all of those things are very possible as
serious constraints on the surveillance state.

But I ultimately think that where the greatest hope lies is with the
people in this room and the skills that all of you possess. The privacy technologies that have already been developed: the Tor Browser, PGP, OTR, and a variety of other products are making real inroads.
